<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-10" id="chapter-10-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">Showing who the amiable lady, and her unamiable maid, were.</p>
			</header>
			<p>As in the month of June, the damask rose, which chance hath planted among the lilies, with their candid hue mixes his vermilion; or as some playsome heifer in the pleasant month of May diffuses her odoriferous breath over the flowery meadows; or as, in the blooming month of April, the gentle, constant dove, perched on some fair bough, sits meditating on her mate; so, looking a hundred charms and breathing as many sweets, her thoughts being fixed on her Tommy, with a heart as good and innocent as her face was beautiful, Sophia (for it was she herself) lay reclining her lovely head on her hand, when her maid entered the room, and, running directly to the bed, cried, “Madam⁠—madam⁠—who doth your ladyship think is in the house?” Sophia, starting up, cried, “I hope my father hath not overtaken us.”⁠—“No, madam, it is one worth a hundred fathers; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones himself is here at this very instant.”⁠—“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones!” says Sophia, “it is impossible! I cannot be so fortunate.” Her maid averred the fact, and was presently detached by her mistress to order him to be called; for she said she was resolved to see him immediately.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour had no sooner left the kitchen in the manner we have before seen than the landlady fell severely upon her. The poor woman had indeed been loading her heart with foul language for some time, and now it scoured out of her mouth, as filth doth from a mud-cart, when the board which confines it is removed. Partridge likewise shovelled in his share of calumny, and (what may surprise the reader) not only bespattered the maid, but attempted to sully the lily-white character of Sophia herself. “Never a barrel the better herring,” cries he, “<i xml:lang="la">Noscitur à socio</i>, is a true saying. It must be confessed, indeed, that the lady in the fine garments is the civiller of the two; but I warrant neither of them are a bit better than they should be. A couple of Bath trulls, I’ll answer for them; your quality don’t ride about at this time o’ night without servants.”⁠—“Sbodlikins, and that’s true,” cries the landlady, “you have certainly hit upon the very matter; for quality don’t come into a house without bespeaking a supper, whether they eat or no.”</p>
			<p>While they were thus discoursing, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour returned and discharged her commission, by bidding the landlady immediately wake <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, and tell him a lady wanted to speak with him. The landlady referred her to Partridge, saying, “he was the squire’s friend: but, for her part, she never called menfolks, especially gentlemen,” and then walked sullenly out of the kitchen. Honour applied herself to Partridge; but he refused, “for my friend,” cries he, “went to bed very late, and he would be very angry to be disturbed so soon.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour insisted still to have him called, saying, “she was sure, instead of being angry, that he would be to the highest degree delighted when he knew the occasion.”⁠—“Another time, perhaps, he might,” cries Partridge; “but <i xml:lang="la">non omnia possumus omnes</i>. One woman is enough at once for a reasonable man.”⁠—“What do you mean by one woman, fellow?” cries Honour.⁠—“None of your fellow,” answered Partridge. He then proceeded to inform her plainly that Jones was in bed with a wench, and made use of an expression too indelicate to be here inserted; which so enraged <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour, that she called him jackanapes, and returned in a violent hurry to her mistress, whom she acquainted with the success of her errand, and with the account she had received; which, if possible, she exaggerated, being as angry with Jones as if he had pronounced all the words that came from the mouth of Partridge. She discharged a torrent of abuse on the master, and advised her mistress to quit all thoughts of a man who had never shown himself deserving of her. She then ripped up the story of Molly Seagrim, and gave the most malicious turn to his formerly quitting Sophia herself; which, I must confess, the present incident not a little countenanced.</p>
			<p>The spirits of Sophia were too much dissipated by concern to enable her to stop the torrent of her maid. At last, however, she interrupted her, saying, “I never can believe this; some villain hath belied him. You say you had it from his friend; but surely it is not the office of a friend to betray such secrets.”⁠—“I suppose,” cries Honour, “the fellow is his pimp; for I never saw so ill-looked a villain. Besides, such profligate rakes as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones are never ashamed of these matters.”</p>
			<p>To say the truth, this behaviour of Partridge was a little inexcusable; but he had not slept off the effect of the dose which he swallowed the evening before; which had, in the morning, received the addition of above a pint of wine, or indeed rather of malt spirits; for the perry was by no means pure. Now, that part of his head which Nature designed for the reservoir of drink being very shallow, a small quantity of liquor overflowed it, and opened the sluices of his heart; so that all the secrets there deposited run out. These sluices were indeed, naturally, very ill-secured. To give the best-natured turn we can to his disposition, he was a very honest man; for, as he was the most inquisitive of mortals, and eternally prying into the secrets of others, so he very faithfully paid them by communicating, in return, everything within his knowledge.</p>
			<p>While Sophia, tormented with anxiety, knew not what to believe, nor what resolution to take, Susan arrived with the sack-whey. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour immediately advised her mistress, in a whisper, to pump this wench, who probably could inform her of the truth. Sophia approved it, and began as follows: “Come hither, child; now answer me truly what I am going to ask you, and I promise you I will very well reward you. Is there a young gentleman in this house, a handsome young gentleman, that⁠—.” Here Sophia blushed and was confounded.⁠—“A young gentleman,” cries Honour, “that came hither in company with that saucy rascal who is now in the kitchen?”⁠—Susan answered, “There was.”⁠—“Do you know anything of any lady?” continues Sophia, “any lady? I don’t ask you whether she is handsome or no; perhaps she is not; that’s nothing to the purpose; but do you know of any lady?”⁠—“La, madam,” cries Honour, “you will make a very bad examiner. Hark’ee, child,” says she, “is not that very young gentleman now in bed with some nasty trull or other?” Here Susan smiled, and was silent. “Answer the question, child,” says Sophia, “and here’s a guinea for you.”⁠—“A guinea! madam,” cries Susan; “la, what’s a guinea? If my mistress should know it I shall certainly lose my place that very instant.”⁠—“Here’s another for you,” says Sophia, “and I promise you faithfully your mistress shall never know it.” Susan, after a very short hesitation, took the money, and told the whole story, concluding with saying, “If you have any great curiosity, madam, I can steal softly into his room, and see whether he be in his own bed or no.” She accordingly did this by Sophia’s desire, and returned with an answer in the negative.</p>
			<p>Sophia now trembled and turned pale. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour begged her to be comforted, and not to think any more of so worthless a fellow. “Why there,” says Susan, “I hope, madam, your ladyship won’t be offended; but pray, madam, is not your ladyship’s name Madam Sophia Western?”⁠—“How is it possible you should know me?” answered Sophia. “Why that man, that the gentlewoman spoke of, who is in the kitchen, told about you last night. But I hope your ladyship is not angry with me.”⁠—“Indeed, child,” said she, “I am not; pray tell me all, and I promise you I’ll reward you.”⁠—“Why, madam,” continued Susan, “that man told us all in the kitchen that Madam Sophia Western⁠—indeed I don’t know how to bring it out.”⁠—Here she stopped, till, having received encouragement from Sophia, and being vehemently pressed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour, she proceeded thus:⁠—“He told us, madam, though to be sure it is all a lie, that your ladyship was dying for love of the young squire, and that he was going to the wars to get rid of you. I thought to myself then he was a false-hearted wretch; but, now, to see such a fine, rich, beautiful lady as you be, forsaken for such an ordinary woman; for to be sure so she is, and another man’s wife into the bargain. It is such a strange unnatural thing, in a manner.”</p>
			<p>Sophia gave her a third guinea, and, telling her she would certainly be her friend if she mentioned nothing of what had passed, nor informed anyone who she was, dismissed the girl, with orders to the postboy to get the horses ready immediately.</p>
			<p>Being now left alone with her maid, she told her trusty waiting-woman, “That she never was more easy than at present. I am now convinced,” said she, “he is not only a villain, but a low despicable wretch. I can forgive all rather than his exposing my name in so barbarous a manner. That renders him the object of my contempt. Yes, Honour, I am now easy; I am indeed; I am very easy”; and then she burst into a violent flood of tears.</p>
			<p>After a short interval spent by Sophia, chiefly in crying, and assuring her maid that she was perfectly easy, Susan arrived with an account that the horses were ready, when a very extraordinary thought suggested itself to our young heroine, by which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones would be acquainted with her having been at the inn, in a way which, if any sparks of affection for her remained in him, would be at least some punishment for his faults.</p>
			<p>The reader will be pleased to remember a little muff, which hath had the honour of being more than once remembered already in this history. This muff, ever since the departure of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, had been the constant companion of Sophia by day, and her bedfellow by night; and this muff she had at this very instant upon her arm; whence she took it off with great indignation, and, having writ her name with her pencil upon a piece of paper which she pinned to it, she bribed the maid to convey it into the empty bed of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, in which, if he did not find it, she charged her to take some method of conveying it before his eyes in the morning.</p>
			<p>Then, having paid for what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Honour had eaten, in which bill was included an account for what she herself might have eaten, she mounted her horse, and, once more assuring her companion that she was perfectly easy, continued her journey.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
