<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-18" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-18-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">In which the history is continued.</p>
				</header>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allworthy, in his last speech, had recollected some tender ideas concerning Jones, which had brought tears into the good man’s eyes. This <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller observing, said, “Yes, yes, sir, your goodness to this poor young man is known, notwithstanding all your care to conceal it; but there is not a single syllable of truth in what those villains said. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nightingale hath now discovered the whole matter. It seems these fellows were employed by a lord, who is a rival of poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones, to have pressed him on board a ship.⁠—I assure them I don’t know who they will press next. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nightingale here hath seen the officer himself, who is a very pretty gentleman, and hath told him all, and is very sorry for what he undertook, which he would never have done, had he known <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones to have been a gentleman; but he was told that he was a common strolling vagabond.”</p>
				<p>Allworthy stared at all this, and declared he was a stranger to every word she said. “Yes, sir,” answered she, “I believe you are.⁠—⁠It is a very different story, I believe, from what those fellows told this lawyer.”</p>
				<p>“What lawyer, madam? what is it you mean?” said Allworthy. “Nay, nay,” said she, “this is so like you to deny your own goodness: but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nightingale here saw him.” “Saw whom, madam?” answered he. “Why, your lawyer, sir,” said she, “that you so kindly sent to enquire into the affair.” “I am still in the dark, upon my honour,” said Allworthy. “Why then do you tell him, my dear sir,” cries she. “Indeed, sir,” said Nightingale, “I did see that very lawyer who went from you when I came into the room, at an alehouse in Aldersgate, in company with two of the fellows who were employed by Lord Fellamar to press <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones, and who were by that means present at the unhappy rencounter between him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzpatrick.” “I own, sir,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller, “when I saw this gentleman come into the room to you, I told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nightingale that I apprehended you had sent him thither to inquire into the affair.” Allworthy showed marks of astonishment in his countenance at this news, and was indeed for two or three minutes struck dumb by it. At last, addressing himself to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nightingale, he said, “I must confess myself, sir, more surprised at what you tell me than I have ever been before at anything in my whole life. Are you certain this was the gentleman?” “I am most certain,” answered Nightingale. “At Aldersgate?” cries Allworthy. “And was you in company with this lawyer and the two fellows?”⁠—“I was, sir,” said the other, “very near half an hour.” “Well, sir,” said Allworthy, “and in what manner did the lawyer behave? did you hear all that past between him and the fellows?” “No, sir,” answered Nightingale, “they had been together before I came.⁠—In my presence the lawyer said little; but, after I had several times examined the fellows, who persisted in a story directly contrary to what I had heard from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones, and which I find by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzpatrick was a rank falshood, the lawyer then desired the fellows to say nothing but what was the truth, and seemed to speak so much in favour of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones, that, when I saw the same person with you, I concluded your goodness had prompted you to send him thither.”⁠—“And did you not send him thither?” says <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller.⁠—“Indeed I did not,” answered Allworthy; “nor did I know he had gone on such an errand till this moment.”⁠—“I see it all!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller, “upon my soul, I see it all! No wonder they have been closeted so close lately. Son Nightingale, let me beg you run for these fellows immediately⁠—⁠find them out if they are aboveground. I will go myself”⁠—“Dear madam,” said Allworthy, “be patient, and do me the favour to send a servant upstairs to call <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dowling hither, if he be in the house, or, if not, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blifil.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller went out muttering something to herself, and presently returned with an answer, “That <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dowling was gone; but that the t’other,” as she called him, “was coming.”</p>
				<p>Allworthy was of a cooler disposition than the good woman, whose spirits were all up in arms in the cause of her friend. He was not however without some suspicions which were near akin to hers. When Blifil came into the room, he asked him with a very serious countenance, and with a less friendly look than he had ever before given him, “Whether he knew anything of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dowling’s having seen any of the persons who were present at the duel between Jones and another gentleman?”</p>
				<p>There is nothing so dangerous as a question which comes by surprise on a man whose business it is to conceal truth, or to defend falshood. For which reason those worthy personages, whose noble office it is to save the lives of their fellow-creatures at the Old Bailey, take the utmost care, by frequent previous examination, to divine every question which may be asked their clients on the day of tryal, that they may be supplyed with proper and ready answers, which the most fertile invention cannot supply in an instant. Besides, the sudden and violent impulse on the blood, occasioned by these surprises, causes frequently such an alteration in the countenance, that the man is obliged to give evidence against himself. And such indeed were the alterations which the countenance of Blifil underwent from this sudden question, that we can scarce blame the eagerness of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller, who immediately cryed out, “Guilty, upon my honour! guilty, upon my soul!”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allworthy sharply rebuked her for this impetuosity; and then turning to Blifil, who seemed sinking into the earth, he said, “Why do you hesitate, sir, at giving me an answer? You certainly must have employed him; for he would not, of his own accord, I believe, have undertaken such an errand, and especially without acquainting me.”</p>
				<p>Blifil then answered, “I own, sir, I have been guilty of an offence, yet may I hope your pardon?”⁠—“My pardon,” said Allworthy, very angrily.⁠—“Nay, sir,” answered Blifil, “I knew you would be offended; yet surely my dear uncle will forgive the effects of the most amiable of human weaknesses. Compassion for those who do not deserve it, I own is a crime; and yet it is a crime from which you yourself are not entirely free. I know I have been guilty of it in more than one instance to this very person; and I will own I did send <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dowling, not on a vain and fruitless enquiry, but to discover the witnesses, and to endeavour to soften their evidence. This, sir, is the truth; which, though I intended to conceal from you, I will not deny.”</p>
				<p>“I confess,” said Nightingale, “this is the light in which it appeared to me from the gentleman’s behaviour.”</p>
				<p>“Now, madam,” said Allworthy, “I believe you will once in your life own you have entertained a wrong suspicion, and are not so angry with my nephew as you was.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller was silent; for, though she could not so hastily be pleased with Blifil, whom she looked upon to have been the ruin of Jones, yet in this particular instance he had imposed upon her as well as upon the rest; so entirely had the devil stood his friend. And, indeed, I look upon the vulgar observation, “That the devil often deserts his friends, and leaves them in the lurch,” to be a great abuse on that gentleman’s character. Perhaps he may sometimes desert those who are only his cup acquaintance; or who, at most, are but half his; but he generally stands by those who are thoroughly his servants, and helps them off in all extremities, till their bargain expires.</p>
				<p>As a conquered rebellion strengthens a government, or as health is more perfectly established by recovery from some diseases; so anger, when removed, often gives new life to affection. This was the case of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allworthy; for Blifil having wiped off the greater suspicion, the lesser, which had been raised by Square’s letter, sunk of course, and was forgotten; and Thwackum, with whom he was greatly offended, bore alone all the reflections which Square had cast on the enemies of Jones.</p>
				<p>As for that young man, the resentment of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allworthy began more and more to abate towards him. He told Blifil, “He did not only forgive the extraordinary efforts of his good-nature, but would give him the pleasure of following his example.” Then, turning to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller with a smile which would have become an angel, he cryed, “What say you, madam? shall we take a hackney-coach, and all of us together pay a visit to your friend? I promise you it is not the first visit I have made in a prison.”</p>
				<p>Every reader, I believe, will be able to answer for the worthy woman; but they must have a great deal of good-nature, and be well acquainted with friendship, who can feel what she felt on this occasion. Few, I hope, are capable of feeling what now passed in the mind of Blifil; but those who are will acknowledge that it was impossible for him to raise any objection to this visit. Fortune, however, or the gentleman lately mentioned above, stood his friend, and prevented his undergoing so great a shock; for at the very instant when the coach was sent for, Partridge arrived, and, having called <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller from the company, acquainted her with the dreadful accident lately come to light; and hearing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allworthy’s intention, begged her to find some means of stopping him: “For,” says he, “the matter must at all hazards be kept a secret from him; and if he should now go, he will find <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones and his mother, who arrived just as I left him, lamenting over one another the horrid crime they have ignorantly committed.”</p>
				<p>The poor woman, who was almost deprived of her senses at his dreadful news, was never less capable of invention than at present. However, as women are much readier at this than men, she bethought herself of an excuse, and, returning to Allworthy, said, “I am sure, sir, you will be surprised at hearing any objection from me to the kind proposal you just now made; and yet I am afraid of the consequence of it, if carried immediately into execution. You must imagine, sir, that all the calamities which have lately befallen this poor young fellow must have thrown him into the lowest dejection of spirits; and now, sir, should we all on a sudden fling him into such a violent fit of joy, as I know your presence will occasion, it may, I am afraid, produce some fatal mischief, especially as his servant, who is without, tells me he is very far from being well.”</p>
				<p>“Is his servant without?” cries Allworthy; “pray call him hither. I will ask him some questions concerning his master.”</p>
				<p>Partridge was at first afraid to appear before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allworthy; but was at length persuaded, after <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller, who had often heard his whole story from his own mouth, had promised to introduce him.</p>
				<p>Allworthy recollected Partridge the moment he came into the room, though many years had passed since he had seen him. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller, therefore, might have spared here a formal oration, in which, indeed, she was something prolix; for the reader, I believe, may have observed already that the good woman, among other things, had a tongue always ready for the service of her friends.</p>
				<p>“And are you,” said Allworthy to Partridge, “the servant of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones?” “I can’t say, sir,” answered he, “that I am regularly a servant, but I live with him, an’t please your honour, at present. <i>Non sum qualis eram</i>, as your honour very well knows.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allworthy then asked him many questions concerning Jones, as to his health, and other matters; to all which Partridge answered, without having the least regard to what was, but considered only what he would have things appear; for a strict adherence to truth was not among the articles of this honest fellow’s morality or his religion.</p>
				<p>During this dialogue <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nightingale took his leave, and presently after <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Miller left the room, when Allworthy likewise despatched Blifil; for he imagined that Partridge when alone with him would be more explicit than before company. They were no sooner left in private together than Allworthy began, as in the following chapter.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
