<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-16" id="chapter-16-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The consequence of the preceding visit.</p>
			</header>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzpatrick having received the letter before mentioned from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Western, and being by that means acquainted with the place to which his wife was retired, returned directly to Bath, and thence the day after set forward to London.</p>
			<p>The reader hath been already often informed of the jealous temper of this gentleman. He may likewise be pleased to remember the suspicion which he had conceived of Jones at Upton, upon his finding him in the room with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Waters; and, though sufficient reasons had afterwards appeared entirely to clear up that suspicion, yet now the reading so handsome a character of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones from his wife, caused him to reflect that she likewise was in the inn at the same time, and jumbled together such a confusion of circumstances in a head which was naturally none of the clearest, that the whole produced that green-eyed monster mentioned by Shakespeare in his tragedy of Othello.</p>
			<p>And now, as he was enquiring in the street after his wife, and had just received directions to the door, unfortunately <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones was issuing from it.</p>
			<p>Fitzpatrick did not yet recollect the face of Jones; however, seeing a young well-dressed fellow coming from his wife, he made directly up to him, and asked him what he had been doing in that house? “for I am sure,” said he, “you must have been in it, as I saw you come out of it.”</p>
			<p>Jones answered very modestly, “That he had been visiting a lady there.”⁠—To which Fitzpatrick replied, “What business have you with the lady?”⁠—Upon which Jones, who now perfectly remembered the voice, features, and indeed coat, of the gentleman, cried out⁠—“Ha, my good friend! give me your hand; I hope there is no ill blood remaining between us, upon a small mistake which happened so long ago.”</p>
			<p>“Upon my soul, sir,” said Fitzpatrick, “I don’t know your name nor your face.”⁠—“Indeed, sir,” said Jones, “neither have I the pleasure of knowing your name, but your face I very well remember to have seen before at Upton, where a foolish quarrel happened between us, which, if it is not made up yet, we will now make up over a bottle.”</p>
			<p>“At Upton!” cried the other;⁠—“Ha! upon my soul, I believe your name is Jones?”⁠—“Indeed,” answered he, “it is.”⁠—“O! upon my soul,” cries Fitzpatrick, “you are the very man I wanted to meet. Upon my soul I will drink a bottle with you presently; but first I will give you a great knock over the pate. There is for you, you rascal. Upon my soul, if you do not give me satisfaction for that blow, I will give you another.” And then, drawing his sword, put himself in a posture of defence, which was the only science he understood.</p>
			<p>Jones was a little staggered by the blow, which came somewhat unexpectedly; but presently recovering himself he also drew, and though he understood nothing of fencing, prest on so boldly upon Fitzpatrick, that he beat down his guard, and sheathed one half of his sword in the body of the said gentleman, who had no sooner received it than he stepped backwards, dropped the point of his sword, and leaning upon it, cried, “I have satisfaction enough: I am a dead man.”</p>
			<p>“I hope not,” cries Jones, “but whatever be the consequence, you must be sensible you have drawn it upon yourself.” At this instant a number of fellows rushed in and seized Jones, who told them he should make no resistance, and begged some of them at least would take care of the wounded gentleman.</p>
			<p>“Ay,” cries one of the fellows, “the wounded gentleman will be taken care enough of; for I suppose he hath not many hours to live. As for you, sir, you have a month at least good yet.”⁠—“D⁠⸺⁠n me, Jack,” said another, “he hath prevented his voyage; he’s bound to another port now”; and many other such jests was our poor Jones made the subject of by these fellows, who were indeed the gang employed by Lord Fellamar, and had dogged him into the house of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fitzpatrick, waiting for him at the corner of the street when this unfortunate accident happened.</p>
			<p>The officer who commanded this gang very wisely concluded that his business was now to deliver his prisoner into the hands of the civil magistrate. He ordered him, therefore, to be carried to a public-house, where, having sent for a constable, he delivered him to his custody.</p>
			<p>The constable, seeing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones very well dressed, and hearing that the accident had happened in a duel, treated his prisoner with great civility, and at his request despatched a messenger to enquire after the wounded gentleman, who was now at a tavern under the surgeon’s hands. The report brought back was, that the wound was certainly mortal, and there were no hopes of life. Upon which the constable informed Jones that he must go before a justice. He answered, “Wherever you please; I am indifferent as to what happens to me; for though I am convinced I am not guilty of murder in the eye of the law, yet the weight of blood I find intolerable upon my mind.”</p>
			<p>Jones was now conducted before the justice, where the surgeon who dressed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzpatrick appeared, and deposed that he believed the wound to be mortal; upon which the prisoner was committed to the Gatehouse. It was very late at night, so that Jones would not send for Partridge till the next morning; and, as he never shut his eyes till seven, so it was near twelve before the poor fellow, who was greatly frightened at not hearing from his master so long, received a message which almost deprived him of his being when he heard it.</p>
			<p>He went to the Gatehouse with trembling knees and a beating heart, and was no sooner arrived in the presence of Jones than he lamented the misfortune that had befallen him with many tears, looking all the while frequently about him in great terror; for as the news now arrived that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzpatrick was dead, the poor fellow apprehended every minute that his ghost would enter the room. At last he delivered him a letter, which he had like to have forgot, and which came from Sophia by the hands of Black George.</p>
			<p>Jones presently despatched everyone out of the room, and, having eagerly broke open the letter, read as follows:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>You owe the hearing from me again to an accident which I own surprises me. My aunt hath just now shown me a letter from you to Lady Bellaston, which contains a proposal of marriage. I am convinced it is your own hand; and what more surprises me is, that it is dated at the very time when you would have me imagine you was under such concern on my account.⁠—I leave you to comment on this fact. All I desire is, that your name may never more be mentioned to</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">
						<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. W.</abbr>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Of the present situation of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones’s mind, and of the pangs with which he was now tormented, we cannot give the reader a better idea than by saying, his misery was such that even Thwackum would almost have pitied him. But, bad as it is, we shall at present leave him in it, as his good genius (if he really had any) seems to have done. And here we put an end to the sixteenth book of our history.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
