<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-18" id="chapter-18-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p epub:type="se:bridgehead">A further continuation.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Allworthy took an opportunity, whilst he was in the chair, of reading the letter from Jones to Sophia, which Western delivered him; and there were some expressions in it concerning himself which drew tears from his eyes. At length he arrived at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Western’s, and was introduced to Sophia.</p>
			<p>When the first ceremonies were past, and the gentleman and lady had taken their chairs, a silence of some minutes ensued; during which the latter, who had been prepared for the visit by her father, sat playing with her fan, and had every mark of confusion both in her countenance and behaviour. At length Allworthy, who was himself a little disconcerted, began thus: “I am afraid, Miss Western, my family hath been the occasion of giving you some uneasiness; to which, I fear, I have innocently become more instrumental than I intended. Be assured, madam, had I at first known how disagreeable the proposals had been, I should not have suffered you to have been so long persecuted. I hope, therefore, you will not think the design of this visit is to trouble you with any further solicitations of that kind, but entirely to relieve you from them.”</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said Sophia, with a little modest hesitation, “this behaviour is most kind and generous, and such as I could expect only from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy; but as you have been so kind to mention this matter, you will pardon me for saying it hath, indeed, given me great uneasiness, and hath been the occasion of my suffering much cruel treatment from a father who was, till that unhappy affair, the tenderest and fondest of all parents. I am convinced, sir, you are too good and generous to resent my refusal of your nephew. Our inclinations are not in our own power; and whatever may be his merit, I cannot force them in his favour.”⁠—“I assure you, most amiable young lady,” said Allworthy, “I am capable of no such resentment, had the person been my own son, and had I entertained the highest esteem for him. For you say truly, madam, we cannot force our inclinations, much less can they be directed by another.”⁠—“Oh! sir,” answered Sophia, “every word you speak proves you deserve that good, that great, that benevolent character the whole world allows you. I assure you, sir, nothing less than the certain prospect of future misery could have made me resist the commands of my father.”⁠—“I sincerely believe you, madam,” replied Allworthy, “and I heartily congratulate you on your prudent foresight, since by so justifiable a resistance you have avoided misery indeed!”⁠—“You speak now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy,” cries she, “with a delicacy which few men are capable of feeling! but surely, in my opinion, to lead our lives with one to whom we are indifferent must be a state of wretchedness. Perhaps that wretchedness would be even increased by a sense of the merits of an object to whom we cannot give our affections. If I had married <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blifil⁠—” “Pardon my interrupting you, madam,” answered Allworthy, “but I cannot bear the supposition.⁠—Believe me, Miss Western, I rejoice from my heart, I rejoice in your escape.⁠—I have discovered the wretch for whom you have suffered all this cruel violence from your father to be a villain.”⁠—“How, sir!” cries Sophia⁠—“you must believe this surprises me.”⁠—“It hath surprised me, madam,” answered Allworthy, “and so it will the world.⁠—But I have acquainted you with the real truth.”⁠—“Nothing but truth,” says Sophia, “can, I am convinced, come from the lips of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy.⁠—Yet, sir, such sudden, such unexpected news.⁠—Discovered, you say⁠—may villainy be ever so!”⁠—“You will soon enough hear the story,” cries Allworthy;⁠—“at present let us not mention so detested a name.⁠—I have another matter of a very serious nature to propose. Oh! Miss Western, I know your vast worth, nor can I so easily part with the ambition of being allied to it.⁠—I have a near relation, madam, a young man whose character is, I am convinced, the very opposite to that of this wretch, and whose fortune I will make equal to what his was to have been. Could I, madam, hope you would admit a visit from him?”⁠—Sophia, after a minute’s silence, answered, “I will deal with the utmost sincerity with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy. His character, and the obligation I have just received from him, demand it. I have determined at present to listen to no such proposals from any person. My only desire is to be restored to the affection of my father, and to be again the mistress of his family. This, sir, I hope to owe to your good offices. Let me beseech you, let me conjure you, by all the goodness which I, and all who know you, have experienced, do not, the very moment when you have released me from one persecution, do not engage me in another as miserable and as fruitless.”⁠—“Indeed, Miss Western,” replied Allworthy, “I am capable of no such conduct; and if this be your resolution, he must submit to the disappointment, whatever torments he may suffer under it.”⁠—“I must smile now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy,” answered Sophia, “when you mention the torments of a man whom I do not know, and who can consequently have so little acquaintance with me.”⁠—“Pardon me, dear young lady,” cries Allworthy, “I begin now to be afraid he hath had too much acquaintance for the repose of his future days; since, if ever man was capable of a sincere, violent, and noble passion, such, I am convinced, is my unhappy nephew’s for Miss Western.”⁠—“A nephew of yours, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy!” answered Sophia. “It is surely strange. I never heard of him before.”⁠—“Indeed, madam,” cries Allworthy, “it is only the circumstance of his being my nephew to which you are a stranger, and which, till this day, was a secret to me.⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, who has long loved you, he! he is my nephew!”⁠—“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones your nephew, sir!” cries Sophia, “can it be possible?”⁠—“He is, indeed, madam,” answered Allworthy; “he is my own sister’s son⁠—as such I shall always own him; nor am I ashamed of owning him. I am much more ashamed of my past behaviour to him; but I was as ignorant of his merit as of his birth. Indeed, Miss Western, I have used him cruelly⁠—Indeed I have.”⁠—Here the good man wiped his eyes, and after a short pause proceeded⁠—“I never shall be able to reward him for his sufferings without your assistance.⁠—Believe me, most amiable young lady, I must have a great esteem of that offering which I make to your worth. I know he hath been guilty of faults; but there is great goodness of heart at the bottom. Believe me, madam, there is.” Here he stopped, seeming to expect an answer, which he presently received from Sophia, after she had a little recovered herself from the hurry of spirits into which so strange and sudden information had thrown her: “I sincerely wish you joy, sir, of a discovery in which you seem to have such satisfaction. I doubt not but you will have all the comfort you can promise yourself from it. The young gentleman hath certainly a thousand good qualities, which makes it impossible he should not behave well to such an uncle.”⁠—“I hope, madam,” said Allworthy, “he hath those good qualities which must make him a good husband.⁠—He must, I am sure, be of all men the most abandoned, if a lady of your merit should condescend⁠—” “You must pardon me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy,” answered Sophia; “I cannot listen to a proposal of this kind. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, I am convinced, hath much merit; but I shall never receive <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones as one who is to be my husband⁠—Upon my honour I never will.”⁠—“Pardon me, madam,” cries Allworthy, “if I am a little surprised, after what I have heard from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Western⁠—I hope the unhappy young man hath done nothing to forfeit your good opinion, if he had ever the honour to enjoy it.⁠—Perhaps, he may have been misrepresented to you, as he was to me. The same villainy may have injured him everywhere.⁠—He is no murderer, I assure you; as he hath been called.”⁠—“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy,” answered Sophia, “I have told you my resolution. I wonder not at what my father hath told you; but, whatever his apprehensions or fears have been, if I know my heart, I have given no occasion for them; since it hath always been a fixed principle with me, never to have married without his consent. This is, I think, the duty of a child to a parent; and this, I hope, nothing could ever have prevailed with me to swerve from. I do not indeed conceive that the authority of any parent can oblige us to marry in direct opposition to our inclinations. To avoid a force of this kind, which I had reason to suspect, I left my father’s house, and sought protection elsewhere. This is the truth of my story; and if the world, or my father, carry my intentions any farther, my own conscience will acquit me.”⁠—“I hear you, Miss Western,” cries Allworthy, “with admiration. I admire the justness of your sentiments; but surely there is more in this. I am cautious of offending you, young lady; but am I to look on all which I have hitherto heard or seen as a dream only? And have you suffered so much cruelty from your father on the account of a man to whom you have been always absolutely indifferent?”⁠—“I beg, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy,” answered Sophia, “you will not insist on my reasons;⁠—yes, I have suffered indeed; I will not, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy, conceal⁠—I will be very sincere with you⁠—I own I had a great opinion of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones⁠—I believe⁠—I know I have suffered for my opinion⁠—I have been treated cruelly by my aunt, as well as by my father; but that is now past⁠—I beg I may not be farther pressed; for, whatever hath been, my resolution is now fixed. Your nephew, sir, hath many virtues⁠—he hath great virtues, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy. I question not but he will do you honour in the world, and make you happy.”⁠—“I wish I could make him so, madam,” replied Allworthy; “but that I am convinced is only in your power. It is that conviction which hath made me so earnest a solicitor in his favour.”⁠—“You are deceived indeed, sir; you are deceived,” said Sophia. “I hope not by him. It is sufficient to have deceived me. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy, I must insist on being pressed no farther on this subject. I should be sorry⁠—nay, I will not injure him in your favour. I wish <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones very well. I sincerely wish him well; and I repeat it again to you, whatever demerit he may have to me, I am certain he hath many good qualities. I do not disown my former thoughts; but nothing can ever recall them. At present there is not a man upon earth whom I would more resolutely reject than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones; nor would the addresses of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blifil himself be less agreeable to me.”</p>
			<p>Western had been long impatient for the event of this conference, and was just now arrived at the door to listen; when, having heard the last sentiments of his daughter’s heart, he lost all temper, and, bursting open the door in a rage, cried out⁠—“It is a lie! It is a d⁠⸺⁠n’d lie! It is all owing to that d⁠⸺⁠n’d rascal Jones; and if she could get at un, she’d ha un any hour of the day.” Here Allworthy interposed, and addressing himself to the squire with some anger in his look, he said, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Western, you have not kept your word with me. You promised to abstain from all violence.”⁠—“Why, so I did,” cries Western, “as long as it was possible; but to hear a wench telling such confounded lies⁠—Zounds! doth she think, if she can make vools of other volk, she can make one of me?⁠—No, no, I know her better than thee dost.”⁠—“I am sorry to tell you, sir,” answered Allworthy, “it doth not appear, by your behaviour to this young lady, that you know her at all. I ask pardon for what I say: but I think our intimacy, your own desires, and the occasion justify me. She is your daughter, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Western, and I think she doth honour to your name. If I was capable of envy, I should sooner envy you on this account than any other man whatever.”⁠—“Od-rabbit it!” cries the squire, “I wish she was thine, with all my heart⁠—wouldst soon be glad to be rid of the trouble o’ her.”⁠—“Indeed, my good friend,” answered Allworthy, “you yourself are the cause of all the trouble you complain of. Place that confidence in the young lady which she so well deserves, and I am certain you will be the happiest father on earth.”⁠—“I confidence in her?” cries the squire. “ ’Sblood! what confidence can I place in her, when she won’t do as I would ha’ her? Let her gi’ but her consent to marry as I would ha’ her, and I’ll place as much confidence in her as wouldst ha’ me.”⁠—“You have no right, neighbour,” answered Allworthy, “to insist on any such consent. A negative voice your daughter allows you, and God and nature have thought proper to allow you no more.”⁠—“A negative voice!” cries the squire⁠—“Ay! ay! I’ll show you what a negative voice I ha.⁠—Go along, go into your chamber, go, you stubborn⁠—.” “Indeed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Western,” said Allworthy, “indeed you use her cruelly⁠—I cannot bear to see this⁠—you shall, you must behave to her in a kinder manner. She deserves the best of treatment.”⁠—“Yes, yes,” said the squire, “I know what she deserves: now she’s gone, I’ll show you what she deserves. See here, sir, here is a letter from my cousin, my Lady Bellaston, in which she is so kind to gi’ me to understand that the fellow is got out of prison again; and here she advises me to take all the care I can o’ the wench. Odzookers! neighbour Allworthy, you don’t know what it is to govern a daughter.”</p>
			<p>The squire ended his speech with some compliments to his own sagacity; and then Allworthy, after a formal preface, acquainted him with the whole discovery which he had made concerning Jones, with his anger to Blifil, and with every particular which hath been disclosed to the reader in the preceding chapters.</p>
			<p>Men over-violent in their dispositions are, for the most part, as changeable in them. No sooner then was Western informed of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy’s intention to make Jones his heir, than he joined heartily with the uncle in every commendation of the nephew, and became as eager for her marriage with Jones as he had before been to couple her to Blifil.</p>
			<p>Here <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy was again forced to interpose, and to relate what had passed between him and Sophia, at which he testified great surprise.</p>
			<p>The squire was silent a moment, and looked wild with astonishment at this account.⁠—At last he cried out, “Why, what can be the meaning of this, neighbour Allworthy? Vond o’ un she was, that I’ll be sworn to.⁠—Odzookers! I have hit o’t. As sure as a gun I have hit o’ the very right o’t. It’s all along o’ zister. The girl hath got a hankering after this son of a whore of a lord. I vound ’em together at my cousin my Lady Bellaston’s. He hath turned the head o’ her, that’s certain⁠—but d⁠⸺⁠n me if he shall ha her⁠—I’ll ha’ no lords nor courtiers in my vamily.”</p>
			<p>Allworthy now made a long speech, in which he repeated his resolution to avoid all violent measures, and very earnestly recommended gentle methods to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Western, as those by which he might be assured of succeeding best with his daughter. He then took his leave, and returned back to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miller, but was forced to comply with the earnest entreaties of the squire, in promising to bring <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones to visit him that afternoon, that he might, as he said, “make all matters up with the young gentleman.” At <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Allworthy’s departure, Western promised to follow his advice in his behaviour to Sophia, saying, “I don’t know how ’tis, but d⁠⸺⁠n me, Allworthy, if you don’t make me always do just as you please; and yet I have as good an estate as you, and am in the commission of the peace as well as yourself.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
