<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Whenever this word occurs in our writings, it intends persons without virtue or sense, in all stations; and many of the highest rank are often meant by it. <a href="chapter-1-9.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The English reader will not find this in the poem; for the sentiment is entirely left out in the translation. <a href="chapter-4-13.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the second person of low condition whom we have recorded in this history to have sprung from the clergy. It is to be hoped such instances will, in future ages, when some provision is made for the families of the inferior clergy, appear stranger than they can be thought at present. <a href="chapter-4-14.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“What modesty or measure can set bounds to our desire of so dear a friend?” The word <i xml:lang="la">desiderium</i> here cannot be easily translated. It includes our desire of enjoying our friend again, and the grief which attends that desire. <a href="chapter-5-9.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is an ambiguous phrase, and may mean either a forest well clothed with wood, or well stripped of it. <a href="chapter-5-11.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader may, perhaps, subdue his own patience if he searches for this in Milton. <a href="chapter-6-14.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Deity. <a href="chapter-7-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By this word here, and in most other parts of our work, we mean every reader in the world. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is happy for <abbr>M.</abbr> Dacier that he was not an Irishman. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Firm in himself, who on himself relies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Polish’d and round, who runs his proper course</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And breaks misfortunes with superior force.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—⁠<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8-13.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>… Each desperate blockhead dares to write:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Verse is the trade of every living wight.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—⁠Francis.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a peculiar propriety in mentioning this great actor, and these two most justly celebrated actresses, in this place, as they have all formed themselves on the study of nature only, and not on the imitation of their predecessors. Hence they have been able to excel all who have gone before them; a degree of merit which the servile herd of imitators can never possibly arrive at. <a href="chapter-9-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This word, which the sergeant unhappily mistook for an affront, is a term in logic, and means that the conclusion does not follow from the premises. <a href="chapter-9-6.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Whose vices are not allayed with a single virtue. <a href="chapter-10-1.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A celebrated mantua-maker in the Strand, famous for setting off the shapes of women. <a href="chapter-10-3.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Possibly Circassian. <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was the village where Jones met the Quaker. <a href="chapter-10-9.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Place me where never summer breeze</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Unbinds the glebe, or warms the trees:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Where ever-lowering clouds appear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And angry Jove deforms th’ inclement year.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Place me beneath the burning ray,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Where rolls the rapid car of day;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Love and the nymph shall charm my toils,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The nymph who sweetly speaks, and sweetly smiles.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—⁠<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-12-10.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, and the two Antonini. <a href="chapter-12-12.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the 2nd <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Odyssey</i>, <abbr>ver.</abbr> 175. <a href="chapter-13-2.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lest posterity should be puzzled by this epithet, I think proper to explain it by an advertisement which was published <time datetime="1747-02-01"><abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1, 1747</time>.</p>
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr>⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Broughton proposes, with proper assistance, to open an academy at his house in the Haymarket, for the instruction of those who are willing to be initiated in the mystery of boxing: where the whole theory and practice of that truly British art, with all the various stops, blows, cross-buttocks, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, incident to combatants, will be fully taught and explained; and that persons of quality and distinction may not be deterred from entering into <em>A course of those lectures</em>, they will be given with the utmost tenderness and regard to the delicacy of the frame and constitution of the pupil, for which reason muffles are provided, that will effectually secure them from the inconveniency of black eyes, broken jaws, and bloody noses. <a href="chapter-13-5.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning, perhaps, the bank-bill for £100. <a href="chapter-16-5.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a fact which I knew happen to a poor clergyman in Dorsetshire, by the villainy of an attorney who, not contented with the exorbitant costs to which the poor man was put by a single action, brought afterwards another action on the judgment, as it was called. A method frequently used to oppress the poor, and bring money into the pockets of attorneys, to the great scandal of the law, of the nation, of Christianity, and even of human nature itself. <a href="chapter-18-6.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
